PREDATOR PROTECTION DEVICE (Gen 2): MANUAL
Josh Siva, University of Notre Dame
September 2016

Use:
----
Overview- The purpose of this device is to prevent predation of livestock
located in bomas by scaring away predators. This prevents retaliation killings
of the predators by the farmers who are dependent upon their livestock and
seek to prevent further predation. To this end, the Predator Protection Device
(PPD) attempts to scare away predators by periodically flashing lights and
making sound. The PPD charges during the daylight hours through the solar
panel while it's inactive. Once the device detects that it is night time, it
will become active.

Startup- When the device first receives power (either from charging
sufficiently or being plugged in) the various components are initialized. The
device starts up silently, but to check whether the device is functioning
correctly, one can flip the test switch. In the event of a failure, the lights
will blink red in a specified pattern three times (see Error Codes for more 
details).

Charging- The device must spend the maximum amount of time in the sun each
day if it is going to maintain a sufficient charge. If a device is behaving
strangely or does not appear to be charging sufficiently, then turn the power
off and continue to charge it.

Switches- The function of each switch is as follows:
Power
Volume (low/high)
Light sensitivity (low/high)
Use RTC for day (yes/no)

Sound during event (yes/no)
Lights during event (yes/no)
Interval (5min/15min)
Test (start/-)

SD cards- The SD card closest to the lid is the media SD card and it contains
          the sounds and light patterns that will be played. The other SD card 
	  located further from the lid is the logging SD card which contains the
	  activity log for the device

Error Codes:
------------
All error codes are communicated by all of the LEDs blinking red. The number
of blinks that occur indicates what the issue is. All errors are shown three
times before the device reboots.

Sound failure		- 2 blinks
Light sensor failure	- 3 blinks
Media SD card failure	- 5 blinks
Logging SD card failure	- 6 blinks
RTC failure		- 7 blinks

The SD card related errors are mostly likely to occur if the SD card is
missing or damaged. The light sensors can register a failure if they are
completely covered (as a 0 light condition is very unlikely to occur in 
real life). Aside from these sorts of failures, if the unit is registering
a failure then a hardware component may be malfunctioning and a
replacement may be necessary. Alternatively, an advanced user could attempt
some troubleshooting (See Debugging/Troubleshooting below).

Advanced Use:
-------------
>> Defining custom patterns
   An important part of this device as an investigatory tool is the ability to
   define custom light patterns. It is quite obvious that one in computer
   science may not have the best idea about what sorts of patterns will be
   most effective at detering various predators, and to that end it is possible
   for someone (hopefully a more knowledgeable someone) to define a custom
   pattern to be added to the device's collection of light patterns. To do this,
   one need only examine the files that are located on the logging SD card in
   the "patterns" directory. The file name of a new pattern file must have fewer
   than 8 characters (excluding the extension). The file must contain at least
   one line formatted exactly as follows:

   LED-bit-mask effect r-color g-color b-color duration
   Example:

   The following line will turn one corner of the device to yellow for 5 seconds.

   0100 flash 255 255 0 5000
     ^    ^    ^   ^  ^    ^--- duration is in millisecond and is between 1-9999 ms
     |    |    '---'--'--- amount of red, green, and blue. Each is 0-255  
     |    --- the effect to use. Options are "flash", "alt", and "wave". See below
     |        for more details.
     --- Each digit represents a single LED strip. A 1 indicates that the first led
         strip on the second strand will be affected (a single corner will light up).
         The 0s indicate that the rest of the corners will remain dark. See below
         for more details.

   Note that each element of the line is separated by a single space. Additionally,
   it is possible to define many of these commands in the file--one command per line.

   LED bit mask- Here are some other examples to help illustrate the use of the bit
                 mask
   The following will light up different pairs of LEDs
   0011 flash 255 255 0 1000
   1100 flash 255 255 0 1000
   1010 flash 255 255 0 1000
   1001 flash 255 255 0 1000

   You can change all of them at the same time as well:
   1111 wave 0 0 255 1500

   Effects explained:
      flash - turns the LEDs on for indicated duration and then turns them off
      wave  - turns the LEDs on one at a time per chip for the duration indicated
      alt   - rapidly switches between the color indicated in this command and that
              used in a previous alt command (off is considered the previous to
              start) for the indicated duration.

   Final note: remember that the effect will be played repeatedly for 30 seconds,
   so if you would simply like to loop through a simple sequence then you can keep
   your pattern definition file short and simple.
      
>> Debugging/Troubleshooting
   If the device is malfunctioning then it is possible for an advanced user to
   change how the device runs/starts up so that they can run through some
   troubleshooting tests. These tests should help a user figure out what
   components are failing. To enable debugging, you must add a file to the logging
   SD card called "debug.txt" containing the indicated text. Note that you can
   run as many of these tests as you want and can loop through the tests
   indefinitely by adding the word "repeat" as the last line in the file. Each
   command must be placed on its own line.

   Sound- During the sound test a song is played (a hard rock song by the Foo
          Fighters if you're interested) that plays predominately through one 
          speaker before playing predominately through the other. The LEDs will 
          change color to indicate that the volume has been adjusted to the other 
          speaker.
          Use the text "debug sound"

   Switches- During this test the LEDs will start out yellow, and then as each
             switch is flipped will turn more and more purple. The test is passed
             if the lights blink green twice.
             Use the text "debug switches"

   Sensors- For this test it is best to start out in a bright area with the
            sensors uncovered. The lights should be white to start. By covering
            up both sensors, the device will change the LEDs to blue. Uncover
            the sensors and the LEDs will change to green indicating the test
            has been passed.
            Use the text "debug sensors"

   Patterns- To test if all of the patterns are working as expected run this
             test and examine the patterns as they play.
             Use the text "play all patterns"

   Sounds- To test if all of the sounds are playing as expected, simply run this
           test. Note that only the first 30 seconds of the file is played.
           Use the text "play all sounds"

   Logging- To turn on extra logging information
            Use the text "verbose logging"
